FACTS
1) NO. of yugas
   a) Satya Yug : The first of these Yugas is the Satya Yuga, which expands over a period of 1,728,000 years.
   desc: The Hindu mythology clearly states that all living beings pass through a continuous cycle of creation and destruction. This cycle reiterates itself in four different epochs or Yugas. The first of these Yugas is the Satya Yuga, which expands over a period of 1,728,000 years. The Satya Yuga is said to be the golden age of truth and enlightenment. In this age, people have attained an ideal state of mind and their actions are always reasoned and virtuous. The sacred texts further state that there was a surplus flow of ideas and thoughts between people.
   Everyone led an honest life and completely adhered to truth. Everyone had acquainted the answer to the ultimate question – the origin of everything. And since there was virtually nothing to conceal, even the tiniest thread of thought was accessible to everyone without any verbal communication. The human physiology also significantly differed from the one that we exhibit today. People used to be around 21 cubits (31.5 feet) tall. They also had a lifespan that stretched over hundreds of thousands of years.
   
   b) Treta Yuga: The Hindu scripts state that Treta Yuga spans over a period of 1,296,000 human years.
   desc: It represents the second age in the cycle of Maha Yuga. The Hindu scripts state that Treta Yuga spans over a period of 1,296,000 human years. By the advent of Treta Yuga, the presence of satva (goodness) in human nature had slowly started to diminish. Whatever amount of goodness they retained in their virtue was now accompanied by ever increasing amount of Tamas and rajas. Tamas represented the darkness in human nature and rajas constituted of all the passion a human could conjure. By now, people had nurtured an acute level of intellect, but they had also lost a good deal of control over their body and its physiology.
   The body stature was now lesser than that in the Satya yuga – an average human was around 14 cubits tall, but there were some exceptional beings who had attained godly built and divine persona. To name some, the likes of Rama, Laxamana, Ravana and Hanumana were considered godlike for their extraordinary strength and inimitable intellect.
   
   c) Dwapar Yuga: Dwapar Yuga represents the third age in succession right after Treta Yuga. Also known as the Bronze age, the Dwapar yuga is said to last for 864,000 human years.
   desc: Dwapar Yuga represents the third age in succession right after Treta Yuga. Also known as the Bronze age, the Dwapar yuga is said to last for 864,000 human years. It represents an age where the goodness and evil in human nature are neck in neck. Since the human body loses a substantial amount of purity (satva), people attain a far greater control over their body than their intellect. By the time Dwapar yuga was its peak, the man had already lost control over his innermost body and knowledge. He became more attracted to the materialistic perspective of the world, succumbing to his ever increasing desires. Only the very intellectuals like Bhisma, Dharmaraja and Vidura were able to escape this allure. Eventually, there was a gradual decline in the moral fiber of society. People with enormous physicality became increasingly offensive in their thirst of desire and power. The average human lifespan had also come down to 1000 years.
   
   d) Kali Yuga:  It also happens to have the shortest span that lasts for 432,000 human years.
   desc: The last age in ever repeating cycle of Maha Yuga is the Kali Yuga. It also happens to have the shortest span that lasts for 432,000 human years. The current time period falls under Kali Yuga – also referred to as the Iron Age. As the name already suggests, Kali Yuga witnesses hypocrisy and instability like never before. Human nature is significantly corrupted by the temptations of sin and only a fickle of conscience remains.
   The human body is at its lowest in terms of physicality and intellect. An average man is only 3.5 cubits tall and lives for around 100 to 120 years. Citing the ancient Hindu scripts, it is estimated that around 5000 years of Kali Yuga have already passed by. It is also predicted that when Kali Yuga reaches its dying years, the lifespan of man will be no more than 20 years. This age has been majorly highlighted by man’s unprecedented longing for materialism. In a stark contrast to previous ages, human lives have been convoluted by ignorance and the connection to one’s inner self has been lost.
